Homer Alone
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Not to be confused with Home Alone.
"Homer Alone"
The Simpsons episode
Episode no.	Season 3
Episode 15
Directed by	Mark Kirkland
Written by	David M. Stern
Production code	8F14
Original air date	February 6, 1992
Guest appearance
Phil Hartman as Troy McClure
Episode features
Chalkboard gag	"I will not spank others"[1]
Couch gag	The family forms a pyramid[2]
Commentary	Matt Groening
Al Jean
Dan Castellaneta
Julie Kavner
Mark Kirkland
Brad Bird
Episode chronology
← Previous
"Lisa the Greek"	Next →
"Bart the Lover"
 
The Simpsons (season 3)
List of episodes
"Homer Alone" is the fifteenth episode of the third season of the American animated television series The Simpsons, and the fiftieth episode overall. It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 6, 1992. In the episode, stress from household chores and her family's demands causes Marge to suffer a nervous breakdown, so she vacations alone at a spa. She leaves Bart and Lisa with Patty and Selma; Maggie stays at home with Homer but leaves home looking for her mother, causing Homer to frantically search for her.

The episode was written by David M. Stern and directed by Mark Kirkland. Stern had noticed that most of the writers were pitching stories about Bart and Homer, and he thought a "deeper vein of comedy" could be reached by having Marge suffer from a nervous breakdown.[3] Originally, Marge's trip was to a distressed mother's institute rather than a spa. However, the plot was not well received at the table read for the episode and much of it was re-written. The episode's title references the film Home Alone, which starred David Stern's brother Daniel.

"Homer Alone" contains references to the Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner cartoons, Thelma and Louise, Home Alone, MacGyver, and the song "Baby Come Back" by Player. The episode has received generally positive reviews from critics. During its original airing on Fox during February sweeps, it acquired a 14.2 Nielsen rating.


Contents
1	Plot
2	Production
3	Cultural references
4	Reception
5	References
6	External links
Plot
Stressed from doing household chores and running errands for her family, Marge hears DJs Bill and Marty make a cruel prank call during their radio show. She suddenly snaps when Maggie accidentally breaks her baby bottle, splattering milk everywhere, and blocks traffic by parking her car across both lanes of a bridge. When the police are unable to convince her to move, Homer persuades her to surrender and she is arrested. Since the town's women sympathize with Marge's plight, Mayor Quimby orders her release over Chief Wiggum's objections.

Marge vacations alone at a health spa called Rancho Relaxo. She leaves Bart and Lisa with Patty and Selma; Maggie stays at home with Homer. Marge enjoys her much-needed rest while the rest of the family find it hard to adapt to life without her. Homer finds himself lonely and unable to care for Maggie. Bart and Lisa dislike living with Patty and Selma because they snore loudly, watch MacGyver and Divorce Court, and serve meals of tongue sandwiches, Clamato, Mr. Pibb and soy milk.

Upset by her mother's absence, Maggie leaves the house to find Marge. When Homer and Barney are unable to find her, Homer calls a missing baby hotline. Maggie is found atop the roof of an ice cream shop and returned to Homer as Marge leaves the spa. Marge finds her forlorn and disheveled family waiting for her on a train platform when she arrives home. While Homer and the kids are sleeping next to her that night, Marge tells them she needs their help around the house; they assure her she has nothing to worry about.

Production

David M. Stern wrote the episode.
"Homer Alone" was written by David M. Stern. He had noticed that most of the writers were pitching stories about Bart and Homer, and he thought a "deeper vein of comedy" could be reached by having Marge suffer from a nervous breakdown.[3] Executive producer James L. Brooks immediately approved the idea.[4] Originally, Marge's trip was to a distressed mother's institute so they could show "what made Marge tick". However, the plot was not well received at the table read for the episode.

The writers then re-wrote much of the episode, switching the institute to a spa.[3] They also added a video appearance from the fictional actor Troy McClure, voiced by Phil Hartman. According to executive producer Al Jean, the writers often used McClure as a "panic button" when they felt an episode needed more humor.[4] The episode's title is a play on the 1990 film Home Alone; David Stern's brother Daniel had starred in the movie as one of the main antagonists.[4]

The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland. The scene at the train station where Marge leaves for Rancho Relaxo includes a brief cameo appearance of a character modeled after Simpsons director Jim Reardon. Reardon dislikes flying, and took trains whenever possible, so the animators always tried to include him in scenes at a train station.[5] Susie Dietter served as assistant director for the episode and animated several of the scenes for the subplot with Bart, Lisa, Patty and Selma.[5] In a scene where Homer sings a song to Maggie, he was designed to look dishevelled because the writers had wanted him to look drunk, although no attention was called to it.[5]

Cultural references
The beginning of the episode where Homer chases Bart is a reference to the Warner Bros./Chuck Jones Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner cartoons. The scene freezes, during which Bart and Homer's scientific names are given as Brat'us Don'thaveacow'us and Homo Neanderthal'us respectively.[2] The background in the sequence references the Hanna–Barbera tradition of using backgrounds over and over and making it look like there is an "endless living room".[6] The scene where Marge is booked in prison references the Coen brothers film Raising Arizona.[3]

The song that plays while Homer is on hold on the missing child hotline is "Baby Come Back" by Player.[2] One of the films available at Rancho Relaxo is Thelma and Louise, which Marge ends up watching.[2] "Homer Alone" is the first episode of The Simpsons that shows Patty's and Selma's fondness for MacGyver, and Selma says "Richard Dean Anderson will be in my dreams tonight."[2]

Reception
In its original airing on February 6, 1992, on Fox during February sweeps, the episode acquired a 14.2 Nielsen rating and was viewed in approximately 13.08 million homes. It finished 25th in the ratings for the week of February 3–9, 1992, up from the season's average rank of 37th.[7] The Simpsons was the highest rated show on Fox that week.[8]

Since airing, the episode has received generally positive reviews from critics. The authors of the book I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide, Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, wrote, "After the first few minutes, this episode becomes less about Marge than the family's reliance on her. Bart and Lisa's torturous time at Patty and Selma's is wonderful ... but it's Homer losing Maggie, and working out what to tell Marge upon her return, that provides the best jokes."[2]

DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson felt that the episode "comes close to finding the series in a rut, as it sort of offers another iteration of the 'Homer's a bad father' theme. However, the emphasis on Marge's issues makes it different, and it's also fun to see life at Patty and Selma's place. It's another solid show."[9] Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed rated the episode a 3 (of 5), writing "The episode serves only to demonstrate what is already obvious: that Marge holds the family together. It's entertaining to see Homer struggle with the most basic of parenting skills, but this happens at the expense of all the other episodes this season that show him to be a good father (albeit flawed). Still, it's nice to see Marge get her own show."[10]